Puppet is a free configuration management tool. It automates the deployment and administration of software and system configurations. The core software is housed within the Puppet Server platform and is Linux-based. However, the Puppet Agent application, which creates client nodes, supports a wider variety of operating systems, including Linux, Unix, Windows, and macOS.
Explore cloud server plans

The Puppet Server configuration ecosystem maintains consistency, streamlines administration, and manages configuration changes by specifying intended states. Puppet is an open-source configuration management tool for remote server management and administrative tasks. The official Puppet Server configuration packages are made specifically to support Linux systems.
Key takeaways

There are some essential Puppet Server configuration concepts that you will better understand after reading this article:

    Puppet Server configuration requirements
    The steps involved for installing Puppet on Ubuntu 22.04
    Installing the Puppet Server configuration software on the master node
    Setting up the Puppet Agent software on the client node or nodes
    Diagnosing issues and fixing them via your Puppet Server configuration
    Advantages of using Puppet Server for configuration management 

Puppet Server configuration requirements

The following short list contains the requirements needed before moving forward with a Puppet Server configuration on your system using this tutorial:

    Two Ubuntu systems — one serving as the master node and one or more systems that will serve as client nodes. However, remember that when it comes to your own setup, the Puppet Agent application for client nodes supports various operating systems.
    Access to an account with root privileges.
    Access to the terminal.

This guide will walk you through installing and setting up Puppet on Ubuntu 22.04. Feel free to review the resources available from Liquid Web regarding running Puppet on other distributions of Linux.
Step #1. Update the package lists

Before starting the installation procedure, use the following command to update the packages list:

sudo apt update

Step #2. Modify the host file

In Puppet, hostnames are used by the master and client nodes to interact. Verify that every node has a distinct hostname before installing Puppet. Perform the steps covered in the following sections to endure a successful setup.
2.1. Open the hosts file on each node

Using a text editor, such as the popular one called vim, open the hosts file on each node. For instance, you can use vim to edit the /etc/hosts file as shown below:

sudo vim /etc/hosts

2.2. Add IP addresses for the master and client nodes

In each host file, add the following two lines:

[puppet master ip] puppetmaster puppet
[puppet client ip] puppetclient

Modify the placeholder of [puppet client ip] to reflect the client node’s IP address and the placeholder of [puppet master ip] to represent the master node’s IP address.
2.3. Save the hosts file and close it

Please save the file, then close it on both machines.
Step #3. Install the Puppet Server configuration software on the master node
3.1. Download the Puppet software

On the system for the master node, download the most recent version of Puppet:

wget https://apt.puppetlabs.com/puppet8-release-jammy.deb

In this case, it is Puppet 8. But the version you wish to install should be used with the package URL in the command that contains the URL for Puppet 8, which is https://apt.puppetlabs.com/puppet8-release-jammy.deb in the example above.
3.2. Install the software

After the download is finished, use the following command to install the package:

sudo dpkg -i puppet8-release-jammy.deb

3.3. Update the software

Update the package repository by running this command:

sudo apt update

3.4. Install the Puppet Server

Use the following command to install the Puppet Server:

sudo apt install puppetserver

3.5. Access the puppetserver file

To access the puppetserver file, use the following command:

sudo vim /etc/default/puppetserver

3.6. Adjust the memory

To adjust the memory to 1 GB, edit the values of Xms and Xmx. For example, in the following line within the file, we set them to 1 GB using the syntax shown:

JAVA_ARGS="-Xms1g -Xmx1g -Djruby.logger.class=com.puppetlabs.jruby_utils.jruby.Slf4jLogger"

Make sure to save and exit editing mode for the puppetserver file.
3.7. Start the Puppet service

Start and enable the Puppet service by running these two commands shown below. To the start the service, issue this command:

sudo systemctl start puppetserver

To the enable the service, run this additional command:

sudo systemctl enable puppetserver

3.8. Check the Puppet service status

Check the Puppet service status by running the below command:

sudo systemctl status puppetserver

Step #4. Install the Puppet Agent software on the client node
4.1. Download the most recent version of Puppet

On a client node, download the most recent version of Puppet. Then, run the following command:

wget https://apt.puppetlabs.com/puppet8-release-jammy.deb

You can change the package URL to install the required version. The example above uses Puppet 8.
4.2. Install the package

After the download is finished, use the following command to install the package:

sudo dpkg -i puppet8-release-jammy.deb

4.3. Update the package repository

Next, you will update the package repository again:

sudo apt update

4.4. Install the Puppet Agent software

Install the Puppet Agent software by running the command below:

sudo apt install puppet-agent

Step #5. Defining the Puppet Agent configuration using the master information
5.1. Open the Puppet configuration file

First, open the Puppet configuration file:

sudo nano /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/puppet.conf

5.2. Define the Puppet master information

To define the Puppet master information, insert the lines shown here at the end of the puppet.conf configuration file:

[main]
certname = puppetclient
server = puppetmaster

Then, save and exit the file.
5.3. Start and enable the Puppet service

Start and enable the Puppet service by running the appropriate commands shown below. To the start the service, issue this command:

sudo systemctl start puppet

To the enable the service, run this command:

sudo systemctl enable puppet

Step #6. Check Puppet Agent status

Check the status of the Puppet Agent service by running the below command:

sudo systemctl status puppet

The returned system message should show the status as “ACTIVE” in the output returned after issuing the command.
How to diagnose issues and fix a Puppet Server configuration

Following the steps outlined in this post usually results in a successful implementation of the Puppet platform. However, problems occasionally arise as you go through the installation process. Let’s review two of the most common issues and their corresponding solutions with regard to your newly established Puppet Server configuration.
Common issue example #1. DNS misconfiguration problem description

DNS configuration errors are a common problem during Puppet installation. Proper DNS setup is essential for an installation to be successful. See a potential solution in the next section.
DNS misconfiguration solution steps

To resolve this issue, ensure the DNS is set up correctly for the installation. Use programs like dig or nslookup to validate your DNS settings. Verify that the Puppet Agent can use the assigned hostname to connect to the primary server. Run a network test from the Puppet Agent machine to test this proper network configuration.
Common issue example #2. Incorrect security settings problem description

Incorrect firewall and other security setting configurations might also cause issues while installing Puppet.
Misconfiguration of security settings solution steps

Ma
